---
title: Reading List 2013
layout: post
topics: books
---
I got to read a lot of great books in 2013, shaping a lot of my current thinking
both in terms of business and web operations. If you're looking for something to
read, follow along!

**[Effective Monitoring and Alerting](http://amzn.to/1k04aEv)**

I've developed an interest in improving our monitoring, and this book delivered
some good insight. The book is a quick read, and it ends up delivering a great
idea for how a monitoring system could be structured, without going too much
into implementation details.

There's a distinct lack of books on this topic, so this one is good to start
with.

**[The Signal and the Noise: Why So Many Predictions Fail — but Some Don't](http://amzn.to/VIzk5F)**

From the guy who predicted the 2012 election results, a great introduction on
statistics, probability, written in an entertaining style (i.e. not boring you
with too much math). Gives lots of examples from Nate's personal history of
getting into numbers and probabilities. Very entertaining read and will
definitely make you think about these topics some more.

**[The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable](http://amzn.to/19CvJvW)**

Nassim Taleb has an interesting writing style, to say the least. Among slews of
bashing other people and polishing his own ego, you'll find streaks of genius.

The Black Swan is a great read on managing risk, or the inability of managing
certain risks. If you're running any kind of application in production and are
actively involved in operations, this book is a must-read.

The book's point could be made in a significantly shorter version of it, but
that would of course deprive you from the joys of reading about Taleb's personal
feelings.

**[The Art of Capacity Planning](http://amzn.to/1ggeyTC)**

This book is a classic, and I only got around to reading it this year, shame on
me.

It's wonderfully short and to the point, dealing a lot with monitoring and
making your capacity planning work in the best ways possible.

If you haven't read this book yet, start right now. It's timeless for anyone
working in web operations.

**[Friendly Fire: The Accidental Shootdown of U.S. Black Hawks over Northern
Iraq](http://amzn.to/17MZDcz)**

A book describing in great detail the shootdown of two helicopters over the
no-fly zone in Iraq in the early nineties.

Why is this relevant and interesting? It's pretty terrible that people have died
during this incident.

The fascinating parts of this incident and the book are in what happened in all
the parties involved in the incidents and in the organizations as a whole, for
years leading up to the event.

This book was an eye-opener for me on how I think about production incidents. It
covers in great, great detail the events in a socio-technological organization, the
US military.

There's so much to learn in this book that can be applied to web operations.

**[The Field Guide to Understanding Human Error](http://amzn.to/124nNwD)**

Sidney Dekker is a great writer on topics are very relevant to web operations:
humans.

Human error is a common excuse for production incidents, all the more so when a
plane crashed or other bad things happen.

Dekker puts these things in perspective, and he's helped shape my thinking a
lot. What a human does in a particular situation, why he does it and how the
organization and the work environment have shaped his understanding of a
particular situation.

A great and highly recommended read, goes nicely with Snook's "Friendly Fire."

**[Managing the Unexpected: Resilient Performance in an Age of Uncertainty](http://amzn.to/1dkq4wR)**

I didn't know what to expect from this book, I bought it on a hunch.

It turns out it's an important read when it comes to managing risk and achieving
organizational resilience. Fits in perfectly with the books mentioned just
before.

It looks at a slew of different industries and on how they handle risk and risky
situations. Fire departments, air travel, and lots more.

It introduces the concept of a high resilience organization and a lot of great
ideas, which are picked up by Dekker in a book introduced below.

**[Thinking in Systems](http://amzn.to/1k09Iic)**

**The** book on complex systems and systems theory.

I was amazed, only in hindsight, how important this book is. It introduces the
idea of complex systems and how parts in a complex system interact with each
other, how they influence each other, how even just small changes in one can
have long and delayed effects on others.

The book introduces these concepts in ways not directly related to web
operations and software, but you'll notice the relationships right away.

This is **the** book to read. Read this one first, read it now. The most
influential book I've read in 2013.

After reading "Thinking in Systems", you'll see systems and complex interactions
between systems everywhere. You know why? Because there are systems everywhere.

**[Small Giants: Companies That Chose to Be Great Instead of
Big](http://amzn.to/1d3lKOX)**

Running a [small little business myself](https://travis-ci.com), I strive to get
as much inspiration and insight on how others running their companies as
possible.

This book has been a big inspiration for me. It covers a dozen or so companies
that did everything they could to build a balanced workplace with happy
employees and a long-lasting legacy rather than go for the big buck or for
outside funding.

Lots of great stories in this book. If you're running any kind of business, this
is a great read.

**[The Challenger Launch Decision: Risky Technology, Culture, and Deviance at
NASA ](http://amzn.to/1fEZykf)**

This book is so chock full of insight on behaviors and interactions in
socio-technical organization, it kept blewing my mind over and over.

It's about the Challenger incident in 1986, and everything contributing to this
incident over years leading up to it.

The level of detail extracted by Diane Vaughan is amazing. She introduces the
term "normalization of deviance" in the book, a term that stuck with me, and
that I'm now seeing everywhere. It provides a description for something that
naturally happens, whether we want it or not, but that seems unavoidable.

Again, this book isn't directly related to software, but it's so very relevant
to what we do in web operations. Humans, human interaction, organizations and
culture. I found these bits to be the most interesting and fascinating bits when
it comes to running anything in production.

If you're curious about these bits too, then this book is for you. Together with
"Friendly Fire", it provides amazing insights and learnings for running your own
operations team or how to improve human interaction and culture at your company
overall.

These books are very relevant to the ideas of DevOps.

**[Drift Into Failure](http://amzn.to/1k0cLaf)**

Now that you've read "Thinking in Systems", "Managing the Unexpected", "Friendly
Fire", and "The Challenger Launch Decision", here comes Dekker putting all of
them together, quite literally.

I was quite amazed to find references to all of them in this book.

The books left me wondering a bit on how you can detect normalization of
deviance, what you can learn from the Challenger and Iraq incidents, from
high-resilience organizations.

This book is Dekker helping you find answers.

Read "Thinking in Systems" first, then "Friendly Fire", "Managing the
Unexpected" and "The Challenger Launch Decision", and then read "Drift Into
Failure" to find more practical applications of what's been introduced in the
other books.

I've had my mind blown several times by all of them. They're pretty amazing
eye-openers.

**[Thinking, Fast and Slow](http://amzn.to/1dktFuE)**

Just started reading this, but it seems relevant to the topics of biases. Had it
on my reading list for a while now, so it's about time to read it.

Will have to report back on this soon.

**Free Bonus Reads**

If you need more business-related reading, [I posted a list of the books that
influenced how we run our
company](http://about.travis-ci.org/blog/2013-06-18-books-that-shaped-our-business/)
over at [Travis CI](https://travis-ci.com).

Here's to more reading in 2014!
